this is rala where obviously large
crowds are waiting for the return of
39 all men some of them teenagers who've
been held in Israeli detention who are
being released as part of this exchange
emotions clearly running High we can go
to Nita Ibrahim who's there and rala
Nita talk us through what we're seeing
and
hearing we've just seen Palestinians
marching and carrying one prisoner uh
freed prisoner on their shoulders and
they made their way into the square but
now we are waiting for what we believe
is the bus that is carrying some of
those 39 Palestinians who have been
released remember some of them have
already been released to Jerusalem and
uh the rest are going to be making their
way to the occupied West
Banks Arafat Square as you can see it's
a a a a scene that is emotional that is
filled with feelings of Victory amongst
many Palestinians but it's not uh short
on anyone to say that they remember the
sacrifices that are taking place in Gaza
not just the killings not just the
injury not just the bombing of homes but
the displacement of Palestinians outside
of their homes this is a fear many
Palestinians have that Israel has been
systematically kicking Palestinians out
of their homes in the north of Gaza and
then it's going to Corner them in the
South later on to kind of push them away
uh outside of the besieged Gaza Strip we
are seeing um you know because of this
traffic that we've been seeing also
yesterday the buses took a while to be
able to get to the Final Destination
that is uh planned for uh uh the main
let's call it a celebration but we're
seeing more movement we're seeing more
Palestinians it could be and I'm not
sure it could be that if you can zoom in
a little bit Zakaria that they've
released some of those
prisoners uh from the buses they've let
them off of the buses I mean and then
they're going to make their way here in
like a protest form with Palestinians
carrying the free prisoners with them
again it's a it's a situation that is
unfolding as we are looking but we are
seeing Flags we are seeing cars carrying
Palestinian Flags we've seen uh mostly
fat Flags here today unlike the other
days we can we can see neita we can see
on our screens the images that you are
talking about and we can see now the bus
um arriving into the square or area
where you are not that far away from
that uh exchange happening of course
under the oaces of the International Red
Cross give us a sense of who is on board
who is involved in being released from
Israeli jails we know 39 we know many of
them well all of them are male anything
else yeah we know that three female
prisoners whose name have made it to the
list that Israel published of potential
Palestinians who are going to be
released but uh the the Palestinian
female prisoners uh have been 30 of them
have been released so we have three left
uh from the list we have other women of
course but most of those have been
detained after October the 7th um we
just spoke to a father Mahmud from
Bethlehem he was was telling us that his
son had a year and a half uh left on his
already one year and a half sentence but
now he's here to uh receive him earlier
than planned we've also heard the father
uh Abdullah ma telling us passionately
really and emotionally about his son a
17-year-old who's been behind bars for
six months and we've been hearing very
difficult testimonies from pales Ians
who have been released after October 7th
and they were saying not only has it
been mistreatment not only has it been a
Revenge by the Israeli forces against
those prisoners we've also heard from
women saying that they couldn't get even
their basic needs that they've used to
get them and buy them so you can imagine
this detension they've also have been
cut off from the rest of the world
because you know you have to remember
that those Palestinian prisoners have
been in and out when we talk about the
general population since 1967 in Israeli
jails sometimes you'd see them waving
and and and starting a wave of protests
to achieve certain demands and the fact
that some prisoners have TVs inside the
prison that they can watch and see
certain channels not everything but they
can watch the news this has been
considered an achievement by the
prisoners movement that only have been
able to uh happen because they've led a
lot of protests inside prison including
hunger strikes Collective hunger strikes
so for Palestinians they believe that
those are achievements that they've
gotten now that that they've been taken
away from Palestinians post October 7th
and just another point to add when we
talk to human rights organization they
tell us that the conviction rate in
Israeli prisons is very very High
amounting to 97% or more so what happens
with these Palestinians to avoid long
trials they accept the plea deal even if
it's not what Israel accuses them of
doing so they'll say you threw rocks
against Israeli forces so you can either
stay in lengthy and lengthy courts or
you could be detained uh you could uh be
detained for a a shorter period and pay
are fine so Palestinians choose the
later why because it saves them a little
bit of prison time n we will come back
to you to cover these unfolding events
there in rala